# seattle_mobility_rt
Code and data to reproduce the results and figures in Perofsky _et al._ 2023. "Impacts of human mobility on the citywide transmission dynamics of respiratory viruses in pre- and post-COVID-19 pandemic years"

## Abstract

Many studies have used mobile device location data to model SARS-CoV-2 dynamics, yet relationships between mobility behavior and endemic respiratory pathogens are less understood. We studied the effects of population mobility on the transmission of 16 endemic viruses and SARS-CoV-2 in Seattle over a 4-year period, 2018-2022. Before 2020, visits to schools and daycares, within-city mixing, and visitor inflow preceded or coincided with seasonal outbreaks of endemic viruses. Pathogen circulation dropped substantially after the initiation of COVID-19 stay-at-home orders in March 2020. During this period, mobility was a positive, leading indicator of transmission of all endemic viruses and lagging and negatively correlated with SARS-CoV-2 activity. Mobility was briefly predictive of SARS-CoV-2 transmission when restrictions relaxed but associations weakened in subsequent waves. The rebound of endemic viruses was heterogeneously timed but exhibited stronger, longer-lasting relationships with mobility than SARS-CoV-2. Overall, mobility is most predictive of respiratory virus transmission during periods of dramatic behavioral change and at the beginning of epidemic waves.

Data processing and statistical analyses are performed with the statistical computing software [R](https://www.r-project.org/) (version 4.3.0). Rt estimation via the Epidemia package and time series block bootstrapping were performed using the [NIH Biowulf computing cluster](https://hpc.nih.gov/), which used R version 4.2 at the time the code was written.

Documentation forthcoming...

Please note: Processed pathogen incidence data are provided in the `Epidemia_Models/Epidemia_Models_Biowulf` subfolder. Access to deidentified study participant data requires a signed data access agreement with the Seattle Flu Alliance and can be made available to researchers whose proposed use of the data is approved by study investigators. Requests for data access should be submitted to data@seattleflu.org. Some mobility metrics were generated using SafeGraph Weekly Patterns and Social Distancing datasets, which were originally made freely available to academics in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The SafeGraph Weekly Patterns dataset is currently available to academics for non-commercial use through an institutional university subscription or individual subscription to Dewey (https://www.deweydata.io/). The data access agreement with Dewey does not permit sharing of the raw data. SafeGraph social distancing data are publicly accessible through the Delphi COVIDcast Epidata API (https://cmu-delphi.github.io/delphi-epidata/api/covidcast.html). Mobility data from Meta Data for Good Movement Range Maps are publicly accessible through the Humanitarian Data Exchange (https://data.humdata.org/dataset/movement-range-maps).